So far in this module,
you've learned how to detect,
describe and match features,
as well as how to handle
outliers in our feature
matching results.
We've also explored
an example of how to
use features to localize
an object in an image,
which could be used to estimate
the depth to the object
from a pair of images.
In this lesson,
you will learn how
to perform visual odometry,
a fundamental task for
vision-based state estimation
in autonomous vehicles.
Visual odometry, or VO for short,
can be defined as
the process of incrementally
estimating the pose
of the vehicle by
examining the changes that motion
induces on the images
of its onboard cameras.
It is similar to the concept of
wheel odometry you learned
in the second course,
but with cameras
instead of encoders.
What do you think using
visual odometry might offer
over regular wheel odometry
for autonomous cars?
Visual odometry does
not suffer from wheel
slip while turning
or an uneven terrain
and tends to be able to
produce more accurate
trajectory estimates when
compared to wheel odometry.
This is because of
the larger quantity of
information available
from an image.
However, we usually
cannot estimate
the absolute scale
from a single camera.
What this means is
that estimation of
motion produced from
one camera can be
stretched or compressed in the
3D world without affecting
the pixel feature locations by
adjusting the relative
motion estimate
between the two images.
As a result, we need
at least one additional sensor,
often a second camera or an
inertial measurement unit,
to be able to provide
accurately scaled
trajectories when using VO.
Furthermore, cameras
are sensitive
to extreme illumination changes,
making it difficult
to perform VO at
night and in the presence of
headlights and streetlights.
Finally, as seen with
other odometry
estimation mechanisms,
pose estimates from
VO will always
drift over time as
estimation errors accumulate.
For this reason, we often
quote VO performance
as a percentage error per
unit distance traveled.
Let's define the visual odometry
problem mathematically.
Given two consecutive
image frames,
I_k minus one and I_k,
we want to estimate
a transformation matrix T_k
defined by the translation T
and a rotation R
between the two frames.
Concatenating the sequence
of transformations
estimated at each time
step k from k
naught to capital K
will provide us with
the full trajectory of
the camera over
the sequence of images.
Since the camera is rigidly
attached to the
autonomous vehicle,
this also represents an estimate
of the vehicle's trajectory.
Now we'll describe
the general process
of visual odometry.
We are given two
consecutive image frames,
I_k and I_k minus one,
and we want to estimate
the transformation T_k
between these two frames.
First, we perform feature
detection and description.
We end up with a set
of features f_k minus
one in image k minus
one and F_k in
image of k. We then proceed
to match the features
between the two frames
to find the ones
occurring in both of
our target frames.
After that, we use
the matched features
to estimate the motion between
the two camera frames
represented by
the transformation T_k.
Motion estimation is
the most important step in VO,
and will be the main theme
of this lesson.
The way we perform the
motion estimation step
depends on what type of feature
representation we have.
In 2D-2D motion estimation,
feature matches in
both frames are
described purely in
image coordinates.
This form of visual odometry is
great for tracking objects
in the image frame.
This is extremely useful
for visual tracking and
image stabilization in
videography, for example.
In 3D-3D motion estimation,
feature matches are described
in the world 3D coordinate frame.
This approach requires
the ability to locate
new image features in 3D space,
and is therefore used with
depth cameras, stereo cameras,
and other multi-camera
configurations
that can provide
depth information.
These two cases are
important and follow
the same general visual
odometry framework
that we'll use for
the rest of this lesson.
Let's take a closer look at
3D-2D motion estimation,
where the features from frame k
minus one are specified
in the 3D world
coordinates while
their matches in frame
k are specified in
image coordinates.
Here's how 3D-2D
motion estimation is performed.
We are given the set of
features in frame k minus
one and estimates of their
3D world coordinates.
Furthermore, through
feature matching,
we also have the 2D image
coordinates of the same features
in the new frame
k. Note that since we cannot
recover the scale for
a monocular visual
odometry directly,
we include a scaling
parameter S when forming
the homogeneous feature vector
from the image coordinates.
We want to use
this information to estimate
the rotation matrix R and
a translation vector t between
the two camera frames.
Does this figure remind you of
something that we've
learned about previously?
If you're thinking of camera
calibration, you're correct.
In fact, we use the same
projective geometry equations
we used for calibration in
visual odometry as well.
A simplifying distinction to
note between calibration and
VO is that
the camera intrinsic calibration
matrix k is already known.
So we don't have to
solve for it again.
Our problem now reduces to
the estimation of the
transformation components R and
t from the system of equations
constructed using all of
our matched features.
One way we can solve
for the rotation and
translation t is by
using the Perspective-n-Point
algorithm.
Given feature locations in 3D,
their corresponding
projection in 2D,
and the camera intrinsic
calibration matrix k,
PnP solves for the extrinsic
transformations as follows.
First, PnP uses the Direct
Linear Transform to solve for
an initial guess for R
and t. The DLT method
for estimating R and t
requires a linear model
and constructs
a set of linear
equations to solve
using standard methods
such as SVD.
However, the equations
we have are nonlinear in
the parameters of R and
t. In the next step,
we'll refine the initial
DLT solution with
an iterative nonlinear
optimization technique
such as the Luvenburg
Marquardt method.
The PnP algorithm requires
at least three features
to solve for R and t. When
only three features are used,
four possible solutions results,
and so a fourth feature point is
employed to decide
which solution is valid.
Finally, RANSAC can be
incorporated into PnP by
assuming that the
transformation generated by
PnP on four points is our model.
We then choose a subset of all
feature matches to evaluate
this model and check
the percentage of
inliers that result
to confirm the validity of
the point matches selected.
The PnP method is
an efficient approach to
solving the visual
odometry problem,
but uses only a subset of
the available matches to
compute the solution.
We can improve on PnP by applying
the batch estimation techniques
you studied in course two.
By doing so, we can also
incorporate additional
measurements from
other onboard sensors and
incorporate vision into
the state estimation pipeline.
With vision included,
we can better
handle GPS-denied
environments and
improve both the accuracy
and reliability of
our pose estimates.
There are many more
interesting details to
consider when implementing
VO algorithms.
Fortunately, the PnP method has
a robust implementation
available in OpenCV.
In fact, OpenCV even
contains a version
of PnP with RANSAC incorporated
for outlier rejection.
You can follow the link in
the supplementary reading for
a description on how
to use PnP in OpenCV.
In this lesson, you learned why
visual odometry is an
attractive solution to estimate
the trajectory of a self-driving
car and how to perform
visual odometry for
3D-2D correspondences.
Next week, we'll delve into
a fundamental approach
to extracting
information from images for
self-driving car perception,
deep neural networks.
By this point,
you've now finished
the second week of
visual perception
for self-driving cars.
Don't worry if you
did not acquire
a full grasp of all the material
explained in this week.
In this week's assignment,
you'll be gaining
hands-on experience
on all of these topics.
You'll use feature
detection, matching,
and the PnP algorithm to build
your own autonomous vehicle
visual odometry system in Python.
See you in the next module.